one of the ways my channel sustains
70 000 views a month 80 000 currently
we've been running 90 000 views a month
for a couple months in a row
is that people are always going back and
digging up
my old videos sometimes yes to embarrass
shame and humiliate me
in this case i got a letter from the
audience of someone who is watching news
stories about
the united states of america and their
plans to raise the minimum wage
and they went and looked at my back
catalog of videos discussing the
question of
the advantages and disadvantages of a 15
an hour
minimum wage in the united states of
america he writes in and saying it was
fascinating to rewatch my own videos
on this topic are you saying
that western society in a way
exports its poverty to other countries
question mark continue the quotation
here that it should seek to distance
itself
from importing exploitative goods as it
has with
china and other developing countries
question mark now the very next sentence
is also interesting because the next
thing he says is
quote i guess that's a given
close quote
there are two very interesting issues
being raised by this question
one is minimum wage itself and the other
is
autarky this is autarky
spelled with a k we have two words that
sound exactly the same in english
with completely different meanings and a
slight difference in spelling
right autarky the idea that a country
that a national government
should pursue self-sufficiency and
should cut itself off from
what we would now call globalization
international market international
trading goods this idea has come up
again and again
when i was a child it was still popular
on the left and it was practiced
in some of those moderate socialist
countries that were complete and utter
disasters
and that never get discussed in the same
way that
communist china north korea
or stalin's ussr get discussed this is
this is always the bitter irony if
you'll say oh
oh learn the lessons of history have you
read much about the history of jamaica
like there's history all over i'm not
being ironic at all i'm not being
facetious
you have a lot to learn from the history
of jamaica everyone's ignoring it
like what do you mean learning the
lesson's mystery well i kind of know a
few anecdotes about world war ii
and the vietnam war and how women got
the vote yeah that's history
the omissions right are even more
significant
than the inclusions when we construct
this notion of history and
the lessons of history when people are
preaching that we learn the lessons of
history
what they're normally asking us to do is
disregard about 90
of the world's history and focus on just
a few carefully selected propaganda
lessons drawn from the history of the
world um
you know right next door to china is a
country called
myanmar in myanmar they had
state socialism not communism and they
openly said
that the path they were pursuing was not
communism but they were influenced by
karl marx and marxism and among the
policies they embraced was
autarky now totally non-socialist
non-communist country that also played
games
with this notion was australia right
like australia had the idea obviously at
least in part a result of
world war one world war ii and the cold
war they should make up a whole list of
goods
that they should achieve
self-sufficiency and like
cotton oh what a great idea we should
just grow
all our own cotton we shouldn't export
cotton from
egypt right
both in myanmar and in australia in very
different ways these policies were
disasters and they were disasters of a
kind
that's easily ignored right now
what do i mean well you know what
happened
under stalin in russia what happened
under mao zedong in china or
on a smaller scale it's actually an
interesting contrast to myanmar
the incredibly violent history of
communism in cambodia
those things are hard to ignore you know
there's a museum
in the middle of phnom penh capital city
of cambodia to the disaster that was
communism in cambodia and every year
huge numbers of tourists
and also huge numbers of local people
school children go to this museum and
learn about how terrible
communism was in cambodia
there is no museum anywhere to the
failures of moderate socialism
right not in myanmar not in india
not in africa africa has a long history
of really interesting
socialist non-communist countries that
failed right and not in places like
australia
where it was only just one piece of the
puzzle right it
again didn't define everything the
australian government did but obviously
it influenced many things including the
development of their car industry
that eventually failed many parts of the
economy were shaped by that notion
before
my time canada
had some interest in this notion that
everyone in canada should be forced to
buy washing machines made in canada
because otherwise they'd buy washing
machines that were manufactured by evil
americans
this is before it was dreamed of that
washing machines would be built in
mexico or
right you have probably already guessed
from my tone of voice
that in contrast to this message from a
viewer who obviously has only the best
intention there's a viewer who watched
my earlier videos
about minimum wage and who took from it
the
lesson that i was not trying to teach
that somehow naturally the necessary
implication of what i'm arguing
is that we should refuse to import goods
from china we should refuse to import
goods from
from mexico where should we not
refuse to import kutzer right i
understand this isn't quite declaring
autarky outright right but
this is comparable right to some extent
i think what you're saying is you put up
a fence around europe
for example like it wouldn't just be
switzerland saying they're going to make
everything that needed switzerland
but you put up some kind of fence around
these regional blocks and you would stop
importing things from china stop
importing things from from all over the
world
from africa uh so on and so forth right
so why is that
wrong why is that i think wrong is the
correct word
what did myanmar do wrong why did
myanmar
you know render itself one of the
poorest countries in the world
through what seemed like a kind of
well-researched
scholarly approach to socialism that was
partly informed by karl marx
partly informed by tarabata buddhism you
know didn't go to the extremes
limitating mao zedong and joseph stalin
i mean honestly if you read it on paper
the social program of
naywin in myanmar i think still to this
day
many left-wingers many europeans and
many americans who supported bernie
sanders oh well this sounds great
so it sounds like it and you know by the
way they were also committed to
providing free education and free health
care and uplifting for all kinds of
socialist
uh the de zitarata of social society
were rolled up in this
but i would say to simplify economic
history slightly because there were a
lot of things economically wrong with
socialism it's not just one problem
but to simplify it slightly you know
that one issue of autarky of cutting off
all international trade
all importing and all exporting
basically right of trying to pursue
self-sufficiency
of saying we can grow our own cotton we
can make our own clothing
we can manufacture our own shoes right
that alone
so utterly doomed burmese society
and the burmese economy that of course
after just a few decades
there was no way they could provide
their own education their own
electricity
their own sewage systems their own shoes
their own clothes
the whole country amazingly after the
end of the british empire
after independence got poorer and poorer
because they were committed
to this path of socialist autarky okay
if you're gonna buy shoes who
should you buy shoes from all right
what if the reason why we buy
chinese shoes is that they're the best
what if china is the best country
in the world in making shoes and that's
not just price
right price quality
all things considered if china is the
greatest country
in the world in manufacturing shoes why
should we not
buy our shoes from them and what happens
when you decide for political reasons
that you're going to refuse to buy shoes
from china now
the computer this is being filmed on
was manufactured in china the video
camera
attached the computer was manufactured
in china the microphone
is from china the lamp is from china
i was going to say the bench i'm sitting
on is from china
not sure maybe indonesia
i live in canada but even the wood
products in this room
were not made in canada were not
imported from grant they're they're
from abroad so it is not as simple as
saying oh well we should just
embrace the ethic or ethos of importing
whatever is the best
because it is the best no there's a huge
fundamental problem here
which as i've already pointed out in
earlier videos doesn't just have to do
with minimum wage
but has to do with maximum wage also
what you need
is for different countries different
cities different communities different
neighborhoods
to compete to see who is the best
at making shoes right in terms of some
kind
of meaningful competitive advantage and
not just
in terms of who has the worst labor
regulations
who has the lowest wages who has the
worst
controls in terms of law and order for
everything from pollution
you know so-called economic
externalities like water pollution or
how much water you can use up
uh sorry law and order encompasses many
other things also including
rule of law as it relates to the
investors
who may in an unseen way lurk behind the
creation of the factory and the
exploitation of the labor
and all the rest of it right if you have
global competition
the four low wages then if just one
country
anywhere in the world has wages that are
say one percent
of what the wages would be in your
country you have a situation like we
have now with basically the whole world
in relation to communist china where
everyone increasingly over time
is buying absolutely everything uh made
in china
there are numerous other absurdities
people in california
cross the border to mexico to get dental
work done
because dentists are paid so much less
in mexico right obviously in some sense
the value of a dentist
performing the same dental surgery on
you in california
and the value of that service in mexico
it should be the same or it should only
different price by 10 percent 20
50 we shouldn't be having these dramatic
differences
uh in in wages all right so
are these just two mutually incompatible
ideals
that can never be realized in the real
world no it's incredibly easy
to harmonize these ideals and i think
that's part of why
i don't know i personally feel
uncomfortable talking about this problem
because this is one of those cases where
the solution
is very easy to talk about and the
problem is actually quite complex
it's quite difficult to say anything
meaningful about the problem itself
right
what is the solution globalize minimum
wage
period you need a globally harmonized
minimum wage and you need to have all of
the countries that agree to be part of
that block
to meet whatever that minimum wage is
agree that they're going to have
some kind of trade sanctions against the
people that are
outside of the the block you can have a
very simple
set of uh excise import duties and fees
so that if you're importing something
from a country where they pay their
citizens
half the wages your country pays its own
citizens where you're doubling the price
of it at the border
of course you can fill in the blanks for
how you exactly want to do the math you
can think through the details
so the solution is incredibly simple
and the solution is easy to preach
because it's good for all the
participants
you get to say to people in mexico hey
when you work in a factory manufacturing
a car
you deserve to be paid the same amount
as a white american
working in a factory doing the same work
to manufacture the same car and indeed
you can say to the the mexican dentists
you deserve to be paid the same amount
for doing this dental operation
as an american dentist will be paid like
we can't have a kind of
genetic bias like as if because you're
born in mexico
you should be paid less to do this work
then remember that's fundamentally
unjust that's fundamentally unfair
so it's easy to see how you can mobilize
the mexicans to
ask for this higher wage and you can
turn to the people of detroit
people within the united states of
america and say look
you should be able to compete to see who
can make the best
car you know not on the basis of who can
pay their workers
the least but who really has an
advantage
who is really making the best pair of
shoes who is really making the best car
not who is grinding down their employees
to the the lowest
possible standard so let's continue just
reading this
this question so this is interesting
though because i feel like the ghost of
autarky is
is you know kind of haunting this
discourse and
you know as stupid as the idea of
autarky is
it is fundamentally stupid to think
that australia can farm cotton better
than egypt
it is stupid to think that australia
will be better at making cotton and
clothing
than india or bangladesh there is just
no
reason to think that okay and i remember
i was giving advice to
members of the government in laos this
is in southeast asia laos is a small
country just north of cambodia
they were talking about competing
against the chinese in making
china i.e and making porcelain that in
english language we call china type of
white porcelain
china is famous for i was sitting there
saying to them
china is the best in the world at this
okay you are never going to be able to
make
china cheaper than china you are never
going to be able to make it
at a higher quality than china what you
people need to do
is find something that you are the
greatest in the world at
you know you're not going to make better
tea than china and you're not going to
make better tea cups either and i just
mentioned
these people were communist party
officials but they they were really
receptive to this nobody's ever talking
that way before
they were all people growing up studying
karl marx you know and so they had some
some education economics but have
someone said look this is not the way
economics works like you trying to
imitate china or even trying to close
your border like to force your own
population to buy
teacups made in laos instead of tico all
right
and it's subtle but in that way step by
step throughout the whole economy
right autarky destroys your economy and
a lot of it
has long-term implications i remember
seeing an interview with
a uh an entrepreneur in india and he'd
gone on to become incredibly successful
and he was asked about how things had
changed i think in the 70s 80s and 90s
in india
i don't think he was old enough during
the 1960s and he said oh it was hell
he said the government of india tried to
force us to use
all computers and all computer parts
made within india
and he said for the basic things in his
business and he had to fill out all
these forms
and go to the mayor's office and go to
probably had to deal with all these
government officials just to get an
exception handed to him
so that he could import a computer from
japan to do basic things in his in his
business this is a huge fight because
the government at that time had this
agenda for autarky for so-called
self-reliance right and nobody's
thinking about what's lost
because even if today even if today you
think oh well in the short term
you know it's better for india if we
force them to buy computers made within
india
no what's best for india is that if
people use
the greatest computers made anywhere in
the world if they're able to
import and use the best computers from
japan
simply because they are the best and by
using those computers
you will create a whole new generation
of people in india
who have the know-how and the savvy in
terms of computer programming both
hardware and software
to go on to create you know
the next generation of computer
technology can then happen in india but
if you don't if you cut them off from
that
right you're stuck you're perpetually
behind you're cut off from those devil
so it's it's not obvious what is the
point what is the point of allowing of
allowing me
to import this computer and this camera
and this lamp
from china right but you have to kind of
think of it in terms of full
full life cycle analysis all right the
disadvantages the uh
the way in which protectionism and
autarky the most extreme form of
protectionism the way in which that kind
of corrodes
society at every level and every stage
right oh well now i can't get shoes made
in china anymore
like if you're living in a country like
myanmar or you're living in a country
like canada
suddenly i have shoes at a dramatically
lower quality
at a dramatically higher price
somebody's got to fix the plumbing
but we can't get pipes made in china
anymore
nor can we get them made in germany oh
we can only use locally made
pipes to fix the plumbing like oh we
can't get computers from japan anymore
step by step you know repairing the
plumbing becomes incredibly expensive
and incredibly low quality the growing
of cotton
in australia becomes an environmental
disaster and a disaster in terms of the
waste of taxpayers dollars right
step by step these things really can
corrode
your society in a way that most people
well put it this way in a way that's not
obvious
if you read those burmese propaganda
pamphlets that were describing the path
forward to socialism
and what their justification was for
atari coming out of the background
i mean as almost every one of the world
did coming out of the background
experience of world war ii
and just thinking about independence and
self-reliance
as very positive things it's hard to see
the harm
that's done by the way the genesis
of this whole train of thought in
politics and political science
is by bernard mandeville a book that is
curiously titled the fable of the bees
that is really the beginning of uh it's
the beginning of capitalist liberalism
as a as a political philosophy believe
it or not that is step one
and as the title indicates it's told
with a kind of playful fable
even though it's making a deadly serious
point that as he puts it
uh private vices are in fact public
virtues when you look at society
economically
things that we think are virtues our
vices and things that we think are
our vices our virtues all right so he
says repeating part of this we're going
to finish his comment
quote are you saying that western
society in a way exports its poverty to
other countries
that it should seek to distance itself
from importing exploitative goods
as it has with china and other
developing countries i guess that's a
given
what i really wanted to ask is there a
point where minimum wage
can be mismanaged perhaps if politics
pushed it too high
15 is reasonable he says and reach some
kind of upper bound
would that be detrimental to supporting
the poor by say driving up the cost of
living okay close quote
you are going to get absolutely zero
false optimism
for me on this okay increasing
minimum wage causes misery
in every part of society it forces a
transformation
in the way human beings interact with
everyone else
you stop having a society of waitresses
at small coffee shops so plenty of time
to talk to you and you're starting a
society
where all restaurants are organized like
chipotle where the customers stand in
line like they're cued up at a
prison to have the food put onto a tray
with a
you know with a ladle right as soon as
you're paying
every waitress or every employee at this
restaurant
15 an hour right the nature of the
itself changes the nature of human
interactions
the extent to which people can even talk
to you or even listen to you
changes i had a friend who worked as a
chef so he worked in restaurants a large
part of many decades of his life
and he talked about the way in which not
just higher wages but tighter labor
controls
in france forced him to be an to
his employees in a way he never wanted
to it was one of his reasons for leaving
france
i met him out in outdoor nation but you
know
he said he hated the fact
that he couldn't let his employees go
outside and smoke a cigarette
and he couldn't let them talk on the
phone for 15 minutes with their
girlfriend or something
because they were at a point where they
were being paid so much per hour
there were all these labor regulations
it's like man i need you
you know i need you to be rolling this
dough i need you to be making these
croissants i need to be like
i need to get every minute out of you
because i'm paying you
so much you know under these conditions
so yeah there is a great deal of misery
in all of your human interactions oh
sorry i mean something else
i remember seeing an interview with a
small business owner he was in steel
um it's not really some kind of steel
contractor
and he was talking about the fact that
he could not employ a secretary
he could not employ a human being to
answer the phone and take orders and
just deal with a few things in the
office
and that his his type of business he had
to go out and physically visit
clients and like show them the different
grades of metal apparently
i believe not rolling my eyes but it's
just you know apparently there was a lot
of like going
to the site there's a lot of actually
dealing with people and he said
he can't leave the office to do that
because he can't employ a secretary but
the cost
of employing just one person to answer
the phones was now so high where he was
living that he that he couldn't do it
all right
so your business changes the nature of
employment
the way we live together in society
changes
i mean i remember too like you know
sorry again i'm not i'm pro i'm pro
minimum wage don't get me wrong
you know when i was a kid the school
employed people to just stand around
doing nothing
like there was someone who stood by the
intersection you know
as a crossing guard and there was some
there were like two people standing in
the
in the playground or like you know i can
remember people being employed to do
nothing sorry a lot of public spaces and
we get into
well you know one of the ones you still
see movies making jokes about is having
a bathroom attendant
the employee employs someone at a
restaurant or gentleman's school to just
stand there in the back this is not my
ideal it's not a state society
and you know the last time we went into
a department store
uh to buy uh to buy a shirt actually i
took you to buy this shirt
i'm gonna think about it buy this white
shirt you know i pointed out
like it would be easier to shoplift
than to buy something because it's such
a huge store
and they have so few employees now like
we're walking around
trying to find someone we can pay
someone we can ask where do we pay
it's like you have a huge floor on each
floor there's like one employee
right for the whole store and there's no
you know there's no one else why there
are security cameras in theory right
but like so where the number of staff
gets cut down because many times we've
gone grocery shopping
and i don't want to use a credit card i
want to pay in cash enormous so i'm
remembering this
in the states you know going to kroger
it's a famous grocery store in the
states
there's a huge huge growth i mean it's
the size of a town
it's really it's really it's absolutely
enormous this grocery store
and you get to the front and there's
nobody there's not even one
person employed to stand there and take
your money and we're it's like oh hey
use the automated computer robot
checkout
you know like i don't even have the
alternative to line up and you support
or sometimes
you know depending on time it sounds
there's one person and then they have
the automated
checkups yes you know there are
myriad ways in which minimum wage
transforms society for the worst okay
and let's be all the way real
within the little pockets of society
where labor unions have been powerful
and have raised
wages within that profession within that
workplace you already see this pattern
playing out okay my father went through
school
at a time when his teachers and
university professors were veterans of
world war one not world war ii
world war one and there were people who
had time in that education system
to literally hold his hand and talk he
was my father was a disadvantaged kid
from a single
parent home a single mom in a still
working town
born and raised poor and you know he had
different disadvantages
and there were these people who coddled
him and encouraged him and told him
he could go to harvard university one
day if he worked hard and he
and he did you know there were people
who really spent time
sitting and talking with him you if
you've been watching my channel from
time i
enrolled i paid thousands of thousands
of dollars to study chinese at the
university of victoria
and nobody ever talked to me right
language you're learning chinese life
you need someone to sit and talk with
you personally nope
and what my first year the only time
i spoke this is one year of university
education
a year does not mean 12 months in the
canadian system it's a a
year with quotation marks right the
first year
the only time i spoke was on the final
oral exam
what kind of system education is this
for learning languages right but
i get it i mean each one of these people
is being paid a hundred thousand dollars
you have a whole university system where
the wages are really high
and you know sorry you can look it up
but i mean the actual wages
for even sessional lecturers or whatever
they're listed
for uvic for for each university you can
look it up in the internet what the
labor unions agreement is how much they
paid but guess who suffers
yes ultimately students do suffer
because they're they're not being taught
they're facing the time so there are
there are incredibly serious
disadvantages to having a high minimum
wage there are incredibly serious
disadvantaged to have a minimum wage at
all
hong kong when i was there there was no
minimum wage
and they had restaurants they had
banquet hall restaurants right this
i doubt this exists in hong kong anymore
because now they do have a minimum wage
but definitely never existed canada
they have a huge huge room it's like a
football field
just one huge over with big circular
tables throughout the whole thing
and everywhere uh basically in between
every two tables
so each table could have six people out
of the rainbow it could just have four
people or two people right there
circular
hills between every two tables there'd
be a woman normally good looking
woman in a skirt standing with her hands
fold in front of her
doing nothing her job is to stand there
right they they were paid incredibly
little right
this is the society without none which
and they're stood there
just that any given time someone's
sitting and want to say oh hey can just
put up their hands
and ask something they'll go off and
tell the chef whatever it is
they're just very permanently this was a
this is a banquet hall this is
normal in hong kong right okay you have
15 hour minimum wage
you can't pay people to stand there
doing nothing you reorganize
everything you start being more like the
japanese having a little intercom system
where you press a button on the table
things change all right and obviously
you're talking about education talking
about child care
talking about you know whether it's
babysitting or you know talking about
old folks homes
there are actually a lot of social
services that really matter where this
hour minimum wage is going to change
things and there are going to be people
in the old folks home frankly dying in
their beds
or incredibly uncomfortable wishing
there was someone who could turn them
over or
help take them to the bathroom or help
them when they you know they're lying in
a hospital bed in a state of distress
and there's nobody around
because now there's only one person for
the whole floor instead of 10 people
for that floor in the old folks up right
yeah education is the part of the system
i feel most is what i'm involved in
but many other social services they will
be
eroded by this okay yes
there are ways in which we all embrace
and even love the reckless unfairness
of the free market i mean you know a
whole bunch of people this year got rich
off of bitcoin
you know i think bitcoin's a complete
scam i even think it's somewhat immoral
you know you know but we don't
feel it's an injustice that some people
took that risk
and got rich off of bitcoin and if they
got rich off the bitcoin it didn't make
me any poorer
right the story of the century it's all
these people who got rich off of the
gamestop
short squeeze transaction
for one bedroom a lot of people played
this particular stock in the stock
market maybe someone's watching this
video 10 years from now and they've
forgotten this google it fascinating
footnote in history right some people
got fantastically wealthy
by buying this stock in the store and
it's totally unfair it's totally
ridiculous
right but it's not making me any poorer
if you got rich by taking this risk
taking this gamble right
when we get into these questions of
minimum wage and maximum wage
we're talking about that much harder
part of politics
and you know political economy in the
truest sense of the world right
yes one person is going to get rich
and another person is going to get
poorer a whole lot of restaurants that
are traditional diners are going to have
to shut down and renovate and reopen
to look more like taco bell right to
look more like mcdonald's
where they just have two people at a
counter and they don't have table serve
a lot of things are going to have to
change
okay and you know of course i mean one
of the most obvious ones you know
factories this has even happened in
communist china on a massive scale
the number of people employed in
manufacturing circuit boards
gets smaller and smaller but the amount
the remaining people are paid gets more
and more
right you have a more automated more
streamlined processor whereas before the
large number of unskilled workers
just physically placing the chips on the
circuit board and the pcb
and you get fewer and fewer people more
advanced machinery etc
right but those fewer people are earning
a better these throughout your whole
society
this kind of transformation is is
ongoing and yeah
there are winners and losers and guess
what the number of losers
is far greater than the number of
winners
okay but
there are some things in politics and
economics
that are unfair that we correctly
perceive as an injustice
that needs to be redressed that needs to
be fixed okay
the fact that a dentist in california is
paid so much more than a dentist in
mexico
to do exactly the same operation is an
injustice
it is an absurdity and it is even
economically
irrational it's bad and evil and wrong
it's bad for the united states of
america and it's bad for mexico
the fact that there were factories and
yes i remember
reading a case study of a particular
factory that literally did this
there were factories that were
disassembled in detroit
transported piece by piece to mexico and
reassembled in mexico the same machinery
not the same bricks but the actual metal
components of the
of the machinery were reassembled and
they started producing these in mexico
just because the wages in mexico were so
much lower
it's bad and evil and wrong it's unjust
and it's economically irrational it's
bad for the people of detroit
it's bad for the people united states
america but it's also bad
for the mexicans all right if we regard
the continent
as one unit you can say hey there are
first-class citizens and there are
second-class citizens here it's almost
like a form of economic racism
right oh yeah some people when they do
this job in the factory
get paid 15 an hour and some people get
paid one dollar an hour
to do exactly the same job in the same
factory in that particular case it was
literally the same machinery
and the same process whether it is a
dentist or whether it's an auto worker
or whether it's a farmer right i mean
we have this fundamental sense of
justice
that each man deserves the fruits of his
labor
right but what that means is very much
subject
to supply and demand we have an ideal
of what the market should be right
it should be that whoever makes the best
pair of shoes
wins and you know what china
is the best in making certain kinds of
shoes
and italy is the best at making others
some of you know what i'm talking about
some of you have no idea
italy is still the best for making
certain kinds of shoes
certain kinds of purses right
taiwan makes the best bicycles
both in terms of price and quality
ever in the world you know what the
competition is italy
italy still makes bicycles right paying
a much higher wage
why because they're the best okay
we have a sense of what is just and what
is right
how the market ought to work but we know
it never
can work with this fundamental injustice
this fundamental irrationality
of having a 15 an hour minimum wage in
one country
and a 50 cent minimum wage or a one
dollar minimum wage in another sometimes
as in the case the united states and
mexico even when they are right
next door